# Module 6: Migrating Databases to SQL Server on Linux and Disaster Recovery
- [Module 6: Migrating Databases to SQL Server on Linux and Disaster Recovery](#module-6-migrating-databases-to-sql-server-on-linux-and-disaster-recovery)
  - [Lab: Migrating databases](#lab-migrating-databases)
    - [Exercise 1: Migrate a database with backup and restore](#exercise-1-migrate-a-database-with-backup-and-restore)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment)
      - [Task 2: Back up the database on Windows](#task-2-back-up-the-database-on-windows)
      - [Task 3: Move the backup file to Linux](#task-3-move-the-backup-file-to-linux)
      - [Task 4: Restore the backup on Linux](#task-4-restore-the-backup-on-linux)
    - [Exercise 2: Migrate a database with SQL Server Migration Assistant](#exercise-2-migrate-a-database-with-sql-server-migration-assistant)
      - [Task 1: Install SSMA for Access](#task-1-install-ssma-for-access)
      - [Task 2: Use the SSMA migration wizard](#task-2-use-the-ssma-migration-wizard)
      - [Task 3: Delete the virtual machine](#task-3-delete-the-virtual-machine)

## Lab: Migrating databases

### Exercise 1: Migrate a database with backup and restore

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

1. Create an instance of the **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604** virtual machine in Azure with the following properties:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that \"location is not supported\" then please try with any of the below locations:

        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2

    -   **Image**: Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04

    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **VM disk type**: Standard HDD

    -   **Public inbound ports**: Allow SSH

    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off

    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

2. When deployment is complete, add a networking rule to permit SQL Server to communicate outside Azure, allow inbound connections on TCP port **1433**.

3. Use PuTTY to connect to the virtual machine that you created in the previous step (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

4. Enable the firewall, and allow inbound connections on TCP ports **1433** and **22**.

5. Use **mssql-conf** to change the **sa** password to **Pa55w.rd**.

    **Note**: If there is an error in the output, delete the resource group, and start the demo from the beginning.

6. Enable the **mssql-server-agent** package.

7. Start SQL Server, then log into SQL Server with **sqlcmd** to verify that your change was successful.

8. Close the PuTTY session.

#### Task 2: Back up the database on Windows

1. Run **Setup.cmd** in the **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise01\\Starter** folder as **Administrator**.

2. Using the Microsoft SQL Server Management 17 Studio Object Explorer, take a full backup of the **FirstPayroll** database on the MIA-SQL instance. Use backup compression, and save the backup to **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise01\\firstpayroll.bak**.

#### Task 3: Move the backup file to Linux

-   Use **pcsp** to copy the backup file **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise01\\firstpayroll.bak** to **/tmp/firstpayroll.bak** on your Azure VM (for instructions on installing **pscp**, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module). Close any shell you use to run **pscp** when you have finished.

#### Task 4: Restore the backup on Linux

-   Using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17 Object Explorer, connect to your Azure VM and restore the backup from **/tmp/firstpayroll.bak** to a database called **TestPayroll**. Ensure that the data file and log file for the new database are stored in **/var/opt/mssql/data**.

---

### Exercise 2: Migrate a database with SQL Server Migration Assistant

#### Task 1: Install SSMA for Access

1. Download and install SSMA for Access from **http://aka.ms/ssmaforaccess**. During the installation process, use the link in the **SSMA installer** to download and install the **x64 Access runtime**.

2. Run **Setup.cmd** in the **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise02** folder as Administrator.

#### Task 2: Use the SSMA migration wizard

1. Use the SSMA for Access migration wizard to migrate the **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise02\\Westwind.accdb** Access database to SQL Server on you Azure virtual machine. Migrate all the tables and queries.

2. Use Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, to observe the migrated tables.

#### Task 3: Delete the virtual machine

-   In the Azure portal, delete the Resource group associated with the virtual machine.

