# Module 2: Deploying SQL Server on Linux

- [Module 2: Deploying SQL Server on Linux](#module-2-deploying-sql-server-on-linux)
  - [Lab: Deploying SQL Server on Linux](#lab-deploying-sql-server-on-linux)
    - [Exercise 1: Installing SQL Server](#exercise-1-installing-sql-server)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment)
      - [Task 2: Connect to the Ubuntu server](#task-2-connect-to-the-ubuntu-server)
      - [Task 3: Install SQL Server](#task-3-install-sql-server)
      - [Task 4: Configure the SQL Server](#task-4-configure-the-sql-server)
    - [Exercise 2: Installing command-line tools](#exercise-2-installing-command-line-tools)
      - [Task 1: Configure the SQL Server tools repository](#task-1-configure-the-sql-server-tools-repository)
      - [Task 2: Install command-line tools and configure the PATH variable](#task-2-install-command-line-tools-and-configure-the-path-variable)
    - [Exercise 3: Creating a database](#exercise-3-creating-a-database)
      - [Task 1: Create a database and insert data](#task-1-create-a-database-and-insert-data)
      - [Task 2: Create tables in the new database](#task-2-create-tables-in-the-new-database)
      - [Task 3: Insert data into the new database](#task-3-insert-data-into-the-new-database)
      - [Task 4: Execute database queries](#task-4-execute-database-queries)
      - [Task 5: Delete the Azure virtual machine](#task-5-delete-the-azure-virtual-machine)
    - [Exercise 4: Create a SQL Server 2017 Docker container](#exercise-4-create-a-sql-server-2017-docker-container)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment-1)
      - [Task 2: Pull the SQL Server 2017 Docker image](#task-2-pull-the-sql-server-2017-docker-image)
      - [Task 3: Run a container by using the SQL Server 2017 image](#task-3-run-a-container-by-using-the-sql-server-2017-image)
      - [Task 4: Create a database and insert data](#task-4-create-a-database-and-insert-data)
      - [Task 5: Populate and query the database](#task-5-populate-and-query-the-database)
      - [Task 6: Delete the Docker host](#task-6-delete-the-docker-host)

## Lab: Deploying SQL Server on Linux

### Exercise 1: Installing SQL Server

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

-   Create an instance of the **Ubuntu Server 16.04 LTS** virtual machine in Azure with the following properties:
    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription
    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A
    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A<*YourInitials><Today’s Date*>, for example **10999AAce2017100**
    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:
        -   East US
        -   South Central US
        -   West Europe
        -   Southeast Asia
        -   West US2
    -   **Image**: Ubuntu Server 16.04 LTS
    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2
    -   **Authentication type**: Password
    -   **User name**: student
    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs
    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs
    -   **VM disk type**: Standard HDD
    -   **Public inbound ports**: Allow SSH
    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off
    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

#### Task 2: Connect to the Ubuntu server

-   Use PuTTY to connect to the virtual machine that you created in the previous task. For instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module.


#### Task 3: Install SQL Server

-   Install the SQL Server package by running the following commands in your PuTTY session:
    ```
    curl https://packages.microsoft.com/keys/microsoft.asc | sudo apt-key add -

    sudo add-apt-repository "$(curl https://packages.microsoft.com/config/ubuntu/16.04/mssql-server-2017.list)"

    sudo apt-get update

    sudo apt-get install mssql-server
    ```

#### Task 4: Configure the SQL Server

1. Configure the SQL Server instance by using the **mssql-conf** command with the setup option. Configure the instance as **Evaluation Edition**, and use the **sa** password **Pa55w.rd**.
2. When the configuration is complete, use the **systemctl** command to check the status of the **mssql-server** service.

---

### Exercise 2: Installing command-line tools

#### Task 1: Configure the SQL Server tools repository

-   In PuTTY, register a new repository and update the package lists by using the following commands:
    ```
    sudo add-apt-repository "$(curl https://packages.microsoft.com/config/ubuntu/16.04/prod.list)"

    sudo apt-get update
    ```

#### Task 2: Install command-line tools and configure the PATH variable

1. In PuTTY, execute the following command to install the **SQL Server command-line tools** and **ODBC drivers**:
    ```
    sudo apt-get install -y mssql-tools unixodbc-dev
    ```

2. Execute the following commands to add the tools to the **PATH** environment variable:
    ```
    echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools/bin"' >> ~/.bash_profile

    echo 'export PATH="$PATH:/opt/mssql-tools/bin"' >> ~/.bashrc

    source ~/.bashrc
    ```

---

### Exercise 3: Creating a database

#### Task 1: Create a database and insert data

1. In PuTTY, use the **sqlcmd** tool to connect to the SQL Server on the localhost in interactive mode. Authenticate as the SA account with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2. In the sqlcmd tool, use Transact-SQL commands to create a new database named **AdWorksTest**.

#### Task 2: Create tables in the new database

1. In the sqlcmd tool, use Transact-SQL commands to create a new table in the **AdWorksTest** database named **Staff** with the following columns:
   -   **INT column**: id
   -   **NVARCHAR(50) column**: firstName
   -   **NVARCHAR(50) column**: lastName
   -   **INT column**: categoryID
2. Use Transact-SQL commands to create a new table in the **AdWorksTest** database named **Categories** with the following columns:
   -   **INT column**: id
   -   **NVARCHAR(50) column**: Name

#### Task 3: Insert data into the new database

1. In the sqlcmd tool, use Transact-SQL commands to insert two categories named **Delivery** and **Administration** into the **AdWorksTest** database.
2. Use Transact-SQL commands to insert three staff members, with names of your choice, into the **AdWorksTest** database. Place the new staff into different categories.

#### Task 4: Execute database queries

1. In the sqlcmd tool, use Transact-SQL to display all data in the **Categories** table.
2. Use Transact-SQL to display all data in the **Staff** table.
3. Use Transact-SQL to display a join between data from the **Staff** table and data from the **Categories** table.
4. Close the PuTTY session.

#### Task 5: Delete the Azure virtual machine

-   In the Azure portal, delete the resources that you created in Exercise 1.


---

### Exercise 4: Create a SQL Server 2017 Docker container

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

1. Create a new virtual machine in your Azure subscription based on the Docker on Ubuntu Server template. Use the following information:
   -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription
   -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A
   -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A<*YourInitials><Today’s Date*>, for example **10999AAce2017100**
   -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you
        
        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:
       -   East US
       -   South Central US
       -   West Europe
       -   Southeast Asia
       -   West US2
   -   **Image**: Docker Community Edition With Ubuntu 16.04 Lts
   -   **Size**: Basic A3
   -   **Authentication type**: Password
   -   **User name**: student
   -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs
   -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs
   -   **VM disk type**: Standard HDD
   -   **Public inbound ports**: Allow SSH
   -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off
   -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off
2. Using the public IP address for the new Ubuntu virtual machine, connect over SSH with PuTTY (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

#### Task 2: Pull the SQL Server 2017 Docker image

1. In your PuTTY session, use the docker pull command to install the latest version of the **microsoft/mssql-server-linux** image.
2. Use the docker images command to check the images available on the Ubuntu server.

#### Task 3: Run a container by using the SQL Server 2017 image

1. Using the docker run command in PuTTY, start an instance of the **microsoft/mssql-server-linux:latest** container with the following options:
    -   **Container name**: mssql-latest
    -   **Host name (--hostname switch)**: mssql-latest
    -   **Environment variables**:
        -   ACCEPT_EULA=Y
        -   MSSQL_SA_PASSWORD=Pa55w.rd
    -   **Forwarded ports**: Map local port 14333 to container port 1433
2. Use the **docker ps -a** command to check that the container is running.

#### Task 4: Create a database and insert data

1. In PuTTY, use the docker tool to start an interactive bash session inside the SQL Server 2017 container you ran in the previous task.
2. In the bash shell, start the **sqlcmd** tool in interactive mode, and authenticate with the SQL Server on the localhost as the SA account.
3. In the sqlcmd tool, use Transact-SQL commands to create a new database named **AdWorksTest2**.
4. Use a Transact-SQL command to create a new table in the **AdWorksTest2** database named **Products** with the following columns:
   -   **INT column**: id
   -   **NVARCHAR(50) column**: name
   -   **INT column**: productNumber

#### Task 5: Populate and query the database

1. In the sqlcmd tool, insert some rows into the **Products** table.
2. In the sqlcmd tool, execute a **SELECT** query against the **AdWorksTest2** database.
3. Exit the sqlcmd tool and the PuTTY tool.

#### Task 6: Delete the Docker host

1. In the Azure portal, delete all the resources that you created in the first task of this exercise.
2. Close Internet Explorer.
