# Lab Answer Key: Module 6: Migrating Databases to SQL Server on Linux and Disaster Recovery
- [Lab Answer Key: Module 6: Migrating Databases to SQL Server on Linux and Disaster Recovery](#lab-answer-key-module-6-migrating-databases-to-sql-server-on-linux-and-disaster-recovery)
  - [Lab: Migrating databases](#lab-migrating-databases)
    - [Exercise 1: Migrate a database with backup and restore](#exercise-1-migrate-a-database-with-backup-and-restore)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment)
      - [Task 2: Back up the database on Windows](#task-2-back-up-the-database-on-windows)
      - [Task 3: Move the backup file to Linux](#task-3-move-the-backup-file-to-linux)
      - [Task 4: Restore the backup on Linux](#task-4-restore-the-backup-on-linux)
    - [Exercise 2: Migrate a database with SQL Server Migration Assistant](#exercise-2-migrate-a-database-with-sql-server-migration-assistant)
      - [Task 1: Install SSMA for Access](#task-1-install-ssma-for-access)
      - [Task 2: Use the SSMA migration wizard](#task-2-use-the-ssma-migration-wizard)
      - [Task 3: Delete the virtual machine](#task-3-delete-the-virtual-machine)

## Lab: Migrating databases

### Exercise 1: Migrate a database with backup and restore

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

1. Ensure that the **MT17B-WS2016-NAT**, **10999A-MIA-DC** and **10999A-MIA-SQL** virtual machines are running, and then log on to **10999A-MIA-SQL** as **ADVENTUREWORKS\\Student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

2. Using Microsoft Internet Explorer®, type **https://portal.azure.com** to display the Azure portal. Enter your Microsoft Azure Pass credentials to log on.

3. In Microsoft Azure, in the left menu, click **+ Create a resource**, in the **Search** box, type **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604**, and then press Enter.

4. On the **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604** blade, in the **Select a software plan** list, click **Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04**, and then click **Create**.

5. On the **Create a virtual machine** blade, enter the following information, and then click **Next : Disks \>**:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:


        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2



    -   **Image**: Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04

    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

6. On the **Disks** page, in the **OS disk type** list, click **Standard HDD**, and then click **Next : Networking \>**.

7. On the **Networking** page, next to **Public inbound ports**, click **Allow selected ports**.

8. In the **Select inbound ports** list, select the **SSH** check box, and then click **Next : Management \>**.

9. On the **Management** page, change the value of the following settings, and then click **Review + create**:

    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off

    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

10. On the **Review + create** page, review the summary, and then click **Create**. Deployment might take a few minutes to complete.

11. In the left menu, click **Virtual machines**.

12. On the **Virtual machines** blade, click the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** server.

13. On the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, under **Settings**, click **Networking**.

14. On the **Networking** blade, click **Add inbound port rule**.

15. In the **Add inbound security rule** blade, in the **Destination port ranges** box, type **1433**.

16. In the **Name** box, type **MS_SQL**, and then click **Add**.

17. On the **Networking** blade, click **Overview**.

18. On the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

19. On the Desktop, double-click **putty.exe - Shortcut** (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

20. In the **Open File - Security Warning** dialog box, click **Run**.

21. In the **PuTTY Configuration** dialog box, right-click in the **Host Name (or IP address)** box, click **Paste**, and then click **Open**.

22. If a **PuTTY Security Alert** message box appears, click **Yes**.

23. In the **student\@10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>:\~** window, type **student**, press Enter, type **Pa55w.rdLabs**, and then press Enter. If your login attempt is successful, you will be presented with a prompt starting:
    ```
    student@10999A<YourInitials><Today's Date>:~$
    ```

24. In the PuTTY session, enable the firewall, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo ufw enable
    ```

25. At the **Command may disrupt existing ssh connections** prompt, type **y**, and then press Enter.

26. In the PuTTY session, to open the port of the SQL Server service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo ufw allow 1433
    ```

27. In the PuTTY session, to open the port of the SSH service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo ufw allow 22
    ```

28. In the PuTTY session, to verify the state of the SQL Server service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    systemctl status mssql-server
    ```

    If SQL Server is inactive, the output will include a line that begins:
    ```
    Active: inactive (dead)
    ```

    If SQL Server is active, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl stop mssql-server
    ```

29. In the PuTTY session, to change the **sa** password, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set-sa-password
    ```

30. In the PuTTY session, at the **Enter the SQL Server system administrator password** prompt, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then press Enter.

31. In the PuTTY session, at the **Confirm the SQL Server system administrator password** prompt, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then press Enter.

    **Note**: If there is an error in the output, delete the resource group, and start the demo from the beginning.

32. In the PuTTY session, to start SQL Server, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl start mssql-server
    ```

33. In the PuTTY session, to enable the **mssql-server-agent** package, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set sqlagent.enabled true
    ```

34. In the PuTTY session, to restart the SQL Server service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl restart mssql-server
    ```

35. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the change was successful, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S localhost -U sa -P Pa55w.rd -Q "SELECT @@servername;"
    ```

36. The result should return the server name.

37. Close the PuTTY session.

#### Task 2: Back up the database on Windows

1. In File Explorer, in the **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise01\\Starter** folder, right-click **Setup.cmd**, and then click **Run as administrator**.

2. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**, and then wait for the script to finish.

3. On the Taskbar, click **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17**.

4. In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, in the **Server name** box, type **MIA-SQL**, ensure **Authentication** is set to **Windows Authentication**, and then click **Connect**.

5. In Object Explorer, under **MIA-SQL** expand **Databases**, right-click **FirstPayroll**, point to **Tasks**, and then click **Back Up**.

6. In the **Back Up Database - FirstPayroll** dialog box, on the **General** page, click **Remove**, and then click **Add**.

7. In the **Select Backup Destination** dialog box, in the **File name** box, type **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise01\\firstpayroll.bak**, and then click **OK**.

8. On the **Media Options** page, click **Overwrite all existing backup sets**.

9. On the **Backup Options** page, in the **Set backup compression** list, click **Compress backup**, and then click **OK**.

10. In the **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio** dialog box, click **OK**.

#### Task 3: Move the backup file to Linux

1. In Internet Explorer, on the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

2. Right-click the Start button, and then click **Windows PowerShell (Admin)**.

3. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**.

4. At the PowerShell prompt, type the following command, replacing ***\<IP Address\>*** with the **Public IP** **address** from the step 1, and then press Enter:
    ```
    $server="<IP Address>"
    ```

5. At the PowerShell prompt, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    cd c:\putty
    ```

    The instructions in this step assume that you have downloaded **pscp.exe** as outlined in the module prerequisites topic and copied it to **C:\\putty**. If **pscp.exe** is in another location, type that path instead of **c:\\putty**.

6. At the PowerShell prompt, to copy the backup file to the VM, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    .\pscp D:\Labfiles\Lab06\Exercise01\firstpayroll.bak ("student@" + $server + ":/tmp/firstpayroll.bak")
    ```

7. At the PowerShell prompt, type **Pa55w.rdLabs**, and then press Enter.

8. When the copy is complete, close the PowerShell window.

#### Task 4: Restore the backup on Linux

1. In Internet Explorer, on the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

2. In Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, in Object Explorer, click **Connect**, and then click **Database Engine**.

3. In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, right-click in the **Server name** box, and then click **Paste**.

4. In the **Authentication** box, click **SQL Server Authentication**.

5. In the **Login** box, type **sa**, then in the **Password** box, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then click **Connect**.

6. In Object Explorer, under the node for your Azure VM, right-click **Databases**, and then click **Restore Database**.

7. In the **Restore Database** dialog box, on the **General** page, click **Device**, and then click the ellipsis (**...**) button.

8. In the **Select backup devices** dialog box, ensure that the **Backup media type** list is set to **File**, and then click **Add**.

9. In the **Locate Backup File - *\<machine name\>*** dialog box, go to **/tmp**, click **firstpayroll.bak**, and then click **OK**.

10. In the **Select backup devices** dialog box, click **OK**.

11. In the **Restore Database - FirstPayroll** dialog box, on the **General** page, under **Destination**, in the **Database** box, type **TestPayroll**.

12. On the **Files** page, select **Relocate all files to folder**, and then click **OK**.

13. In the **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio** dialog box, click **OK**.

14. In Object Explorer, expand the **Databases** node of your Azure VM and observe that **TestPayroll** now appears in the list of databases.

---

### Exercise 2: Migrate a database with SQL Server Migration Assistant

#### Task 1: Install SSMA for Access

1. In Internet Explorer, to download SSMA for Access, navigate to **http://aka.ms/ssmaforaccess**, and then click **Download**.

2. On the **Choose the download you want** page, select the **SSMAforAccess_8.2.0.msi** check box, and then click **Next**.

3. In the Internet Explorer message box, click **Allow once.**

4. In the Internet Explorer message box, click **Run**.

5. In the **SSMA for Access Setup** dialog box, click **Next**.

6. On the **Required Component(s) Missing** page, click **Download**.

7. In Internet Explorer, click **Download**, select the **accessruntime_4288-1001_x64_en-us.exe** check box, and then click **Next**.

8. In the Internet Explorer message box, click **Allow once**.

9. In the Internet Explorer message box, click **Run**, and then wait for the download to complete.

10. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**.

11. In the **Microsoft Access Runtime 2016** dialog box, select the **I accept the terms of this agreement** check box, and then click **Continue**.

12. When the installation is complete, click **Close**.

13. Close Internet Explorer.

14. In the **SSMA for Access Setup** dialog box, on the **Required Component(s) Missing** page, click **Next**.

15. On the **End-User License Agreement** page, click **I accept the agreement**, and then click **Next**.

16. On the **Choose Setup Type** page, click **Complete**.

17. On the **Ready to Install** page, clear all the check boxes, and then click **Install**.

18. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**.

19. On the **SSMA for Access Installation Complete** page, click **Finish**.

20. In File Explorer, in the **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise02** folder, right-click **Setup.cmd**, and then click **Run as administrator**.

21. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**, and then wait for the script to finish.

#### Task 2: Use the SSMA migration wizard

1. On the desktop, double-click **Microsoft SQL Server Migration Assistant for Access** to start SSMA.

2. In the **Migration Wizard** dialog box, click **Next**.

3. On the **Create New Project** page, in the **Name** box, type **SSMA_Lab**.

4. In the **Location** box, type **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise02**.

5. In the **Migrate To** box, select **SQL Server 2017**, and then click **Next**.

6. On the **Add Access Databases** page, click **Add Databases**.

7. In the **Open** dialog box, in the **File name** box type **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab06\\Exercise02\\Westwind.accdb**, and then click **Open**.

8. On the **Add Access Databases** page, click **Next**.

9. On the **Select Objects to Migrate** page, expand the tree under the **Westwind** node to show that the database contains queries and tables, but only **Tables** is currently selected.

10. Select the **Queries** check box, and then click **Next**.

11. In Internet Explorer, on the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

12. On the **Connect to SQL Server** page, right-click in the **Server name** box, and then click **Paste**.

13. In the **Database** box, type **Westwind**.

14. In the **Authentication** list, click **SQL Server Authentication**.

15. In the **User name** box, type **sa**, and in the **Password** box, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then click **Next**.

16. In the **Error** dialog box, click **Yes** to create the database.

17. On the **Link Tables** page, click **Next**, and wait while the analysis phase is completed.

18. In the **Synchronize with the Database** dialog box, expand **dbo**, expand **Tables**, expand **Views** to view the object that the migration will create, and then click **OK**.

19. Wait for the migration to complete.

20. On the first row of the **Convert, Load, and Migrate** list, click **Report**.

21. In the **SQL Server Migration Assistant for Access** dialog box, notice that the report gives a summary of errors and an estimated time to manually correct the errors, and then click **Close**.

22. On the **Migration Status** page, click **Close**.

23. Close SSMA without saving any changes.

24. In Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, in Object Explorer, right-click the **Databases** node under the node for your Azure virtual machine, and then click **Refresh**.

25. Expand **Westwind**, and then expand **Tables**, to observe the migrated tables, including the **dbo.Customers** table.

26. Close Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17 without saving any changes.

#### Task 3: Delete the virtual machine

1. In Internet Explorer, on the left blade of the Azure portal, click **Resource groups**.

2. On the **Resource groups** blade, click **10999A**.

3. On the **10999A blade,** click **Delete resource group**.

4. On the **Are you sure you want to delete"10999A"?** blade, type **10999A**, and then click **Delete**. This deletes the virtual machines.

5. If there is a **NetworkWatcherRG** resource group present, repeat steps 2 to 4 to delete.

6. Close all open programs and windows.
