# Module 7: High Availability
- [Module 7: High Availability](#module-7-high-availability)
  - [Lab: High availability](#lab-high-availability)
    - [Exercise 1: Configure log shipping](#exercise-1-configure-log-shipping)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment)
      - [Task 2: Configure the primary server](#task-2-configure-the-primary-server)
        - [Connect to the primary VM](#connect-to-the-primary-vm)
        - [Configure the primary network share](#configure-the-primary-network-share)
      - [Task 3: Configure the secondary server](#task-3-configure-the-secondary-server)
        - [Connect to the secondary VM](#connect-to-the-secondary-vm)
        - [Configure the secondary network share](#configure-the-secondary-network-share)
      - [Task 4: Configure the primary database](#task-4-configure-the-primary-database)
      - [Task 5: Configure the secondary database](#task-5-configure-the-secondary-database)
      - [Task 6: Verify that log shipping is functioning](#task-6-verify-that-log-shipping-is-functioning)
    - [Exercise 2: Create a read-scale availability group](#exercise-2-create-a-read-scale-availability-group)
      - [Task 1: Configure the primary server](#task-1-configure-the-primary-server)
      - [Task 2: Configure the secondary server](#task-2-configure-the-secondary-server)
      - [Task 3: Configure the availability group](#task-3-configure-the-availability-group)
      - [Task 4: Delete the virtual machines](#task-4-delete-the-virtual-machines)

## Lab: High availability

### Exercise 1: Configure log shipping

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

1. Ensure that the **MT17B-WS2016-NAT**, **10999A-MIA-DC** and **10999A-MIA-SQL** virtual machines are running, and then log on to **10999A-MIA-SQL** as **ADVENTUREWORKS\\Student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

2. Create an instance of the **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604** virtual machine in Azure with the following properties:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:

        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2


    -   **Image**: Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04

    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **VM disk type**: Standard HDD

    -   **Public inbound ports**: Allow SSH

    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off

    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

3. When deployment is complete, add a networking rule to permit SQL Server to communicate outside Azure, allow inbound connections on TCP port **1433**.

4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 to create a second VM. On step 2, use the following value:

    -   **Virtual machine name**: S10999\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **S10999Ace2017100**

    -   Make sure that the second VM is in the same virtual network and subnet as the first VM.

#### Task 2: Configure the primary server

##### Connect to the primary VM

1. Use PuTTY to connect to the virtual machine that you created in the previous step with a name beginning with **P** (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

2. Enable the firewall, and allow the following ports:

    -   SQL Server (1433)

    -   SSH (22)

    -   Samba (445)

    -   endpoint communication between the server instances (5022)

3. Set the **sa** password to **Pa55w.rd** using the **sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set-sa-password** command then start SQL Server.

4. Enable the **mssql-server-agent** package, and then restart SQL Server.

##### Configure the primary network share

1. Use **apt-get** to install **samba**, then create a directory **/var/opt/mssql/tlogs** and grant ownership to the **mssql** user, granting full control to the owner only (chmod 0700).

2. Add the following section to the /etc/samba/smb.conf file:
    ```
    [tlogs]
    path=/var/opt/mssql/tlogs
    available=yes
    read only=yes
    browsable=yes
    public=yes
    writable=no
    ```

3. Create a Samba use for **mssql**, with the password **Pa55w.rd123**.

4. Restart Samba services with the following command:
    ```
    sudo systemctl restart smbd.service nmbd.service
    ```

5. Close your PuTTY session when you have finished.

#### Task 3: Configure the secondary server

##### Connect to the secondary VM

1. Use PuTTY to connect to the virtual machine that you created in the previous step with a name beginning with **P** (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

2. Enable the firewall, and allow the following ports:

    -   SQL Server (1433)

    -   SSH (22)

    -   Samba (445)

    -   endpoint communication between the server instances (5022)

3. Set the **sa** password to **Pa55w.rd** using the **sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set-sa-password** command then start SQL Server.

4. Enable the **mssql-server-agent** package, and then restart SQL Server.

##### Configure the secondary network share

1. Use **apt-get** to install **cifs-utils**.

2. Create a new file **/var/opt/mssql/.MarketingLS** with the following contents:
    ```
    username=mssql
    domain=
    password=Pa55w.rd123
    ```

3. Create a new directory **/var/opt/mssql/tlogs**. Change the ownership to **root**, and the permission mask to **0550**. Change the ownership of the **/var/opt/mssql/.MarketingLS** to **root** with a permission mask of **0660**.

4. Edit **/etc/fstab** to make the file share mount permanent. Add the following text to the end of the file:
    ```
    #log shipping share
    //<primary_private_ip>/tlogs /var/opt/mssql/tlogs cifs credentials=/var/opt/mssql/.MarketingLS,ro,uid=mssql,gid=mssql 0 0
    ```

    Replace **\<primary private IP\>** with the private IP address of the primary server.

5. Close your PuTTY session when you have finished.

#### Task 4: Configure the primary database

1. Using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, open the file **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab07\\Lab01\\primary.sql** and connect to the primary server using its public IP address.

2. Edit the file, replacing **\<ip_address_of_secondary_server, varchar(20),\>** with the private IP address of the secondary server, then execute all the commands in the file.

#### Task 5: Configure the secondary database

1. In Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, open the file **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab07\\Lab01\\secondary.sql** and connect to the primary server using its public IP address.

2. Edit the file, replacing all instances of **\<ip_address_of_primary_server, varchar(20),\>** with the private IP address of the primary server, then execute all the commands in the file.

#### Task 6: Verify that log shipping is functioning

1. In Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, open the file **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab07\\Lab01\\verify.sql** and connect to the primary server using its public IP address. Execute the code under the comment that begins **Step 1**, then wait for at least 60 seconds.

2. Change the database connection to connect to the secondary server using its public IP address. Execute the code under the comment that begins **Step 2** to verify that the data changes in step 1 have been shipped to the secondary.

3. Close Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17 without saving any changes. Leave Notepad and Internet Explorer open for the next exercise.

---

### Exercise 2: Create a read-scale availability group

#### Task 1: Configure the primary server

1. Open a PuTTY session to the primary server (the VM with the name beginning **P**). Edit the **/etc/hosts** file to include entries for the private IP addresses of the primary and secondary servers, in the format:
    ```
    <primary private ip address> <primary hostname>
    <secondary private ip address> <secondary hostname>
    ```

2. Enable high availability support with the **sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set hadr.hadrenabled 1** command, then restart SQL Server.

3. Using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, open the file **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab07\\Lab02\\Starter\\primary_ag.sql** and connect to the primary server using its public IP address.

4. Execute the commands under the comments that begin **Step P1** to create the database for this exercise.

5. Under the comment that begins **Step P2**, write a command to enable the **AlwaysOn_health** extended events session, then execute the command.

6. Execute the commands under the comments that begin **Step P3** to create a mirroring user.

7. Execute the commands under the comments that begin **Step P4** to create a certificate, and back it up.

8. Edit the commands under the comments that begin **Step P5** to create a TCP endpoint on port **5022** using the certificate you created in the previous step, then execute the command.

9. Use **scp** to copy the certificate backup files **/var/opt/mssql/data/dbm_certificate.pvk** and **/var/opt/mssql/data/dbm_certificate.cer** to the secondary server.

    You will need to copy the files as the **student** user to the **/tmp** folder.

#### Task 2: Configure the secondary server

1. Open a PuTTY session to the secondary server (the VM with the name beginning **S**). Edit the **/etc/hosts** file to include entries for the private ip addresses of the primary and secondary servers, in the format:
    ```
    <primary private ip address> <primary hostname>
    <secondary private ip address> <secondary hostname>
    ```

2. Enable high availability support with the **sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set hadr.hadrenabled 1** command, then restart SQL Server.

3. Move the certificate backup files that you copied to the secondary server in the previous task to **/var/opt/mssql/data/**, change the ownership of the files to the **mssql** user, and then close your PuTTY session.

4. Using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, open the file **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab07\\Lab02\\Starter\\secondary_ag.sql** and connect to the primary server using its public IP address.

5. Execute the code under the comments that begin **Step S1** and **Step S2**.

6. Edit the code under the comments that begin **Step S3** to restore the certificate and private key from the relevant files, then execute the code.

7. Execute the code under the comments that begin **Step S4** to create an endpoint.

#### Task 3: Configure the availability group

1. In the **primary_ag.sql** window in Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, edit the code under the comment that begins **Step P6** to create a read-scale availability group containing the primary and secondary servers you have configured, then execute the code.

2. Edit the code under the comment that begins **Step P7** to add the **SalesAG** database to the new availability group, then execute the code.

3. In the **secondary_ag.sql** window, edit the code under the comment that begins **Step S5** to join the secondary database to the availability group, then execute the code.

4. Use the code under the comment that begins **Step S6** to monitor the status of the availability group.

5. When you are finished, close Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17 without saving any changes.

#### Task 4: Delete the virtual machines

-   Use the Azure portal to delete the resource group that you created for this lab, and for any other modules in this course.
