# Module 3: Installing Additional Components
- [Module 3: Installing Additional Components](#module-3-installing-additional-components)
  - [Lab: Installing additional components](#lab-installing-additional-components)
    - [Exercise 1: SQL Server Agent](#exercise-1-sql-server-agent)
      - [Task 1: Create an Ubuntu 16.04 LTS VM in Azure](#task-1-create-an-ubuntu-1604-lts-vm-in-azure)
      - [Task 2: Connect to the Linux VM](#task-2-connect-to-the-linux-vm)
      - [Task 3: Enable SQL Server Agent](#task-3-enable-sql-server-agent)
    - [Exercise 2: SQL Server Full-Text Search](#exercise-2-sql-server-full-text-search)
      - [Task 1: Install SQL Server Full-Text Search](#task-1-install-sql-server-full-text-search)
    - [Exercise 3: SQL Server Integration Services](#exercise-3-sql-server-integration-services)
      - [Task 1: Install SSIS](#task-1-install-ssis)
      - [Task 2: Configure SSIS](#task-2-configure-ssis)
    - [Exercise 4: Remove the Azure virtual machine](#exercise-4-remove-the-azure-virtual-machine)
      - [Task 1: Delete the Azure virtual machine](#task-1-delete-the-azure-virtual-machine)

## Lab: Installing additional components

### Exercise 1: SQL Server Agent

#### Task 1: Create an Ubuntu 16.04 LTS VM in Azure

-   Create an instance of the **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604** virtual machine in Azure with the following properties:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that \"location is not supported\" then please try with any of the below locations:

        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2

    -   **Image**: Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04

    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **VM disk type**: Standard HDD

    -   **Public inbound ports**: Allow SSH

    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off

    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

#### Task 2: Connect to the Linux VM

-   Use PuTTY to connect to the virtual machine that you created in the previous task. For instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module.

#### Task 3: Enable SQL Server Agent

-   Use your PuTTY session to enable the **mssql-server-agent** package on your Ubuntu VM. When installation is complete, restart the **mssql-server** service using the **systemctl restart** command.

---

### Exercise 2: SQL Server Full-Text Search

#### Task 1: Install SQL Server Full-Text Search

-   Use your PuTTY session to install or update the **mssql-server-fts** package on your Ubuntu VM. When installation is complete, restart the **mssql-server** service using the **systemctl restart** command.

---

### Exercise 3: SQL Server Integration Services

#### Task 1: Install SSIS

-   Install or update the package **mssql-server-is** on your Ubuntu VM.

#### Task 2: Configure SSIS

1.  Configure the SSIS instance with the **/opt/ssis/bin/ssis-conf** **setup** command. Configure the instance as **Evaluation edition**.

2.  Close your PuTTY session.

---

### Exercise 4: Remove the Azure virtual machine

#### Task 1: Delete the Azure virtual machine

-   In the Azure portal, delete the resources that you created in Exercise 1.
