# Lab Answer Key:  Module 4: Configuring SQL Server on Linux
- [Lab Answer Key:  Module 4: Configuring SQL Server on Linux](#lab-answer-key-module-4-configuring-sql-server-on-linux)
  - [Lab: Configuring SQL Server on Linux](#lab-configuring-sql-server-on-linux)
    - [Exercise 1: Configure SQL Server with mssql-conf](#exercise-1-configure-sql-server-with-mssql-conf)
      - [Task 1: Create a SQL Server on Ubuntu VM in Azure](#task-1-create-a-sql-server-on-ubuntu-vm-in-azure)
      - [Task 2: Connect to the Linux VM](#task-2-connect-to-the-linux-vm)
      - [Task 3: Set the sa password](#task-3-set-the-sa-password)
      - [Task 4: Configure SQL Server maximum memory](#task-4-configure-sql-server-maximum-memory)
      - [Task 5: Configure the SQL Server TCP port](#task-5-configure-the-sql-server-tcp-port)
      - [Task 6: Reset the SQL Server TCP port](#task-6-reset-the-sql-server-tcp-port)
      - [Task 7: Delete the Azure virtual machine](#task-7-delete-the-azure-virtual-machine)
    - [Exercise 2: Configure a SQL Server on Linux Docker image](#exercise-2-configure-a-sql-server-on-linux-docker-image)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment)
      - [Task 2: Pull Docker images](#task-2-pull-docker-images)
      - [Task 3: Start a container from the latest image](#task-3-start-a-container-from-the-latest-image)
      - [Task 4: Start a container from the SQL Server 2017 GA image](#task-4-start-a-container-from-the-sql-server-2017-ga-image)
      - [Task 5: Copy a database backup from a container](#task-5-copy-a-database-backup-from-a-container)
      - [Task 6: Copy a database backup to a container](#task-6-copy-a-database-backup-to-a-container)
      - [Task 7: Delete the Docker host](#task-7-delete-the-docker-host)

## Lab: Configuring SQL Server on Linux

### Exercise 1: Configure SQL Server with mssql-conf

#### Task 1: Create a SQL Server on Ubuntu VM in Azure

1. Ensure that the **MT17B-WS2016-NAT**, **10999A-MIA-DC** and **10999A-MIA-SQL** virtual machines are running, and then log on to **10999A-MIA-SQL** as **ADVENTUREWORKS\\Student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

2. Using Microsoft Internet Explorer®, type **https://portal.azure.com** to display the Azure portal. Enter your Microsoft Azure Pass credentials to log on.

3. In Microsoft Azure, in the left menu, click **+ Create a resource**, in the **Search** box, type **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604**, and then press Enter.

4. On the **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604** blade, in the **Select a software plan** list, click **Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04**, and then click **Create**.

5. On the **Create a virtual machine** blade, enter the following information, and then click **Next : Disks \>**:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:

        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2

    -   **Image**: Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04

    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

6. On the **Disks** page, in the **OS disk type** list, click **Standard HDD**, and then click **Next : Networking \>**.

7. On the **Networking** page, next to **Public inbound ports**, click **Allow selected ports**.

8. In the **Select inbound ports** list, select the **SSH** check box, and then click **Next : Management \>**.

9. On the **Management** page, change the value of the following settings, and then click **Review + create**:

    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off

    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

10. On the **Review + create** page, review the summary, and then click **Create**. Deployment might take a few minutes to complete.

#### Task 2: Connect to the Linux VM

1. In the left menu, click **Virtual machines**.

2. On the **Virtual machines** blade, click the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** server.

3. Next to the **Public IP** address value, click Copy to clipboard.

4. On the Desktop, double-click **putty.exe - Shortcut** (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

5. In the **Open File - Security Warning** dialog box, click **Run**.

6. In the **PuTTY Configuration** dialog box, right-click in the **Host Name (or IP address)** box, click **Paste**, and then click **Open**.

7. If a **PuTTY Security Alert** message box appears, click **Yes**.

8. In the **PuTTY** window, type **student**, press Enter, type **Pa55w.rdLabs**, and then press Enter. If your login attempt is successful, you will be presented with a prompt starting:
    ```
    student@10999A<YourInitials><Today's Date>:~$
    ```

#### Task 3: Set the sa password

1. In the PuTTY session, to verify the state of the SQL Server service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    systemctl status mssql-server
    ```

    If SQL Server is inactive, the output will include a line that begins:
    ```
    Active: inactive (dead)
    ```

    If SQL Server is active, type the following command, and then press
    Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl stop mssql-server
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to change the **sa** password, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set-sa-password
    ```

3. In the PuTTY session, at the **Enter the SQL Server system administrator password** prompt, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then press Enter.

4. In the PuTTY session, at the **Confirm the SQL Server system administrator password** prompt, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then press Enter.

5. In the PuTTY session, to start SQL Server, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl start mssql-server
    ```

6. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the change was successful, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S localhost -U sa -P Pa55w.rd -Q "SELECT @@servername;"
    ```

    The result should return the server name.

#### Task 4: Configure SQL Server maximum memory

1. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set memory.memorylimitmb 2048
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to restart SQL Server, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl restart mssql-server
    ```

3. In the PuTTY session, to review the change in the configuration file, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo cat /var/opt/mssql/mssql.conf
    ```

    The file should include the following section:
    ```
    [memory]
    memorylimitmb = 2048
    ```

#### Task 5: Configure the SQL Server TCP port

1. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then pressEnter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set network.tcpport 10933
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to restart SQL Server, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl restart mssql-server
    ```

3. In the PuTTY session, to review the change in the configuration file, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo cat /var/opt/mssql/mssql.conf
    ```

    The file should include the following section:
    ```
    [network]
    tcpport = 10933
    ```

4. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the change was successful, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S localhost,10933 -U sa -P Pa55w.rd -Q "SELECT @@servername;"
    ```

    The result should return the server name.

    **Note**: If you receive a **Login Timeout Expired** message wait 5 minutes and retry step 4.

#### Task 6: Reset the SQL Server TCP port

1. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf unset network.tcpport
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to restart SQL Server, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl restart mssql-server
    ```

3. In the PuTTY session, to review the change in the configuration file, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo cat /var/opt/mssql/mssql.conf
    ```

    The file should include the following section, with no entry for
    **tcpport**:
    ```
    [network]
    ```

4. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the change was successful, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S localhost -U sa -P Pa55w.rd -Q "SELECT @@servername;"
    ```

    The result should return the server name.

5. In the PuTTY session, type **exit**, and then press Enter to close your PuTTY session.

#### Task 7: Delete the Azure virtual machine

1. In Internet Explorer, on the left blade of the Azure portal, click **Resource groups**.

2. On the **Resource groups** blade, click **10999A**.

3. On the **10999A blade,** click **Delete resource group**.

4. On the **Are you sure you want to delete"10999A"?** blade, type **10999A**, and then click **Delete**. This deletes the virtual machines.

5. If there is a **NetworkWatcherRG** resource group present, repeat steps 2 to 4 to delete.

6. Close all open programs and windows.

---

### Exercise 2: Configure a SQL Server on Linux Docker image

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

1. Using Microsoft Internet Explorer, type **https://portal.azure.com** to display the Azure portal. Enter your Microsoft Azure Pass credentials to log on.

2. In Microsoft Azure, click **+ Create a resource**, in the **Search** box, type **Docker Ubuntu**, and then press Enter.

3. On the **Showing All Results** page, click **Docker Community Edition With Ubuntu 16.04 Lts**.

4. On the **Docker Community Edition With Ubuntu 16.04 Lts** blade, click **Create**.

5. On the **Create a virtual machine** blade, enter the following information, and then click **Next : Disks \>**:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure Subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you.

        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:

        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2

    -   **Image**: Docker Community Edition With Ubuntu 16.04 Lts

    -   **Size**: Basic A3

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

6. On the **Disks** page, in the **OS disk type** list, click **Standard HDD**, and then click **Next : Networking \>**.

7. On the **Networking** page, in the **Configure network security group** box, click **Create new**, click **OK**, and then click **Next : Management \>**.

8. On the **Management** page, next to **Boot diagnostics**, click **Off**.

9. Next to **Enable auto-shutdown**, click **Off**, and then click **Review + create**.

10. On the **Review + create** page, in the **Preferred phone number** box, enter your phone number, and then click **Create**.

11. When the deployment is complete, on the left blade of the Azure portal, click **Virtual machines**.

12. On the **Virtual machines** blade, click **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>**.

13. On the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

14. On the Desktop, double-click **putty.exe - Shortcut** (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

15. In the **Open File - Security Warning** dialog box, click **Run**.

16. In the **PuTTY Configuration** dialog box, right-click in the **Host Name (or IP address)** box, click **Paste**, and then click **Open**.

17. If a **PuTTY Security Alert** message box appears, click **Yes**.

18. In the **PuTTY** window, type **student**, press Enter, type **Pa55w.rdLabs**, and then press Enter. If your login attempt is successful, you will be presented with a prompt starting:
    ```
    student@10999A<YourInitials><Today's Date>:~$
    ```

#### Task 2: Pull Docker images

1. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker pull microsoft/mssql-server-linux:latest
    ```

    The image will be downloaded from Docker Hub as a series of files; this
    might take several minutes.

2. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker pull microsoft/mssql-server-linux:2017-GA
    ```

    The image will be downloaded from Docker Hub as a series of files; this
    might take several minutes.

3. In the PuTTY session, to check that the image exists, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker images
    ```

    The list of images returned by the command should include entries for **microsoft/mssql-server-linux:latest** and **microsoft/mssql-server-linux:2017-GA**. Leave the PuTTY window running for the next task.

#### Task 3: Start a container from the latest image

1. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker run -e 'ACCEPT_EULA=Y' -e 'MSSQL_SA_PASSWORD=Pa55w.rd' --name mssql-latest -h mssql-latest -p 443:1433 -d microsoft/mssql-server-linux:latest
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the container is running, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker ps
    ```

    The **STATUS** column of the results should contain a value starting **Up**, followed by a value in seconds or minutes.

    Note that the sa password is recorded in the environment variable inside the running container. In a production system, you should change the sa password as soon as possible to prevent misuse.

#### Task 4: Start a container from the SQL Server 2017 GA image

1. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker run -e 'ACCEPT_EULA=Y' -e 'MSSQL_SA_PASSWORD=Pa55w.rd1' --name mssql-2017GA -h mssql-2017GA -p 14334:1433 -d microsoft/mssql-server-linux:2017-GA
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the container is running, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker ps
    ```

    The **STATUS** column of the results should contain a value starting **Up**, followed by a value in seconds or minutes.

#### Task 5: Copy a database backup from a container

1. In the PuTTY session, to start an interactive **bash** session inside the 2017 GA container, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker exec -it mssql-2017GA bash
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to connect to the SQL Server instance running inside the container, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S localhost -U sa
    ```

3. In the PuTTY session, at the **Password** prompted, type **Pa55w.rd1**, and then press Enter.

4. In the PuTTY session, to verify the name of the connected SQL Server, type the following SQL command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    CREATE DATABASE lab_db;
    GO
    ```

5. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    BACKUP DATABASE lab_db TO DISK = '/var/opt/mssql/labdb.bak';
    GO
    ```

6. In the PuTTY session, type **quit**, and then press Enter.

7. In the PuTTY session, type **exit**, and then press Enter.

8. In the PuTTY session, to copy the backup file to the host, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker cp mssql-2017GA:/var/opt/mssql/labdb.bak /tmp/labdb.bak
    ```

9. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the file has copied successfully, type the following command, and then press ENTER:
    ```
    ls /tmp
    ```

    **labdb.bak** should appear in the output.

#### Task 6: Copy a database backup to a container

1. In the PuTTY session, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker cp /tmp/labdb.bak mssql-latest:/tmp/labdb.bak
    ```

2. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the file has copied successfully, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo docker exec mssql-latest ls /tmp
    ```

    The output of the command should include **labdb.bak**.

3. In the PuTTY session, type **exit**, and then press Enter.

4. In Internet Explorer, in the Azure portal, on the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** **address** value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

5. On the Start menu, type **PowerShell**, and then press Enter.

6. In PowerShell, to connect to the SQL Server instance running inside the container, type the following, replacing **\<your server ip\>** with the Docker host IP currently in the clipboard, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sqlcmd -S <your server ip>,443 -U sa
    ```

7. In PowerShell, at the **Password** prompted, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then press Enter.

8. In PowerShell, to verify the name of the connected SQL Server, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    SELECT @@SERVERNAME
    GO
    ```

    The result should return the value **mssql-latest**.

9. In PowerShell, to restore the backup, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    RESTORE DATABASE lab_db FROM DISK = '/tmp/labdb.bak';
    GO
    ```

10. In PowerShell, to verify that the database has restored correctly, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    SELECT name FROM sys.databases;
    GO
    ```

    The output should include a listing for **lab_db**.

11. In PowerShell, type **quit**, and then press Enter.

12. In PowerShell, type **exit**, and then press Enter.

#### Task 7: Delete the Docker host

1. In Internet Explorer, on the left blade of the Azure portal, click **Resource groups**.

2. On the **Resource groups** blade, click **10999A**.

3. On the **10999A blade,** click **Delete resource group**.

4. On the **Are you sure you want to delete"10999A"?** blade, type **10999A**, and then click **Delete**. This deletes the virtual machines.

5. If there is a **NetworkWatcherRG** resource group present, repeat steps 2 to 4 to delete.

6. Close all open programs and windows.
