# Module 5: Managing Database Solutions on SQL Server for Linux
- [Module 5: Managing Database Solutions on SQL Server for Linux](#module-5-managing-database-solutions-on-sql-server-for-linux)
  - [Lab: Managing SQL Server on Linux](#lab-managing-sql-server-on-linux)
    - [Exercise 1: Connect to SQL Server on Linux](#exercise-1-connect-to-sql-server-on-linux)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment)
      - [Task 2: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft Visual Studio](#task-2-connect-to-sql-server-with-microsoft-visual-studio)
      - [Task 3: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17](#task-3-connect-to-sql-server-with-microsoft-sql-server-management-studio-17)
    - [Exercise 2: Manage SQL Server on Linux](#exercise-2-manage-sql-server-on-linux)
      - [Task 1: View the SQL Server log file using SQL Server Management Studio](#task-1-view-the-sql-server-log-file-using-sql-server-management-studio)
      - [Task 2: Create and drop a database using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17](#task-2-create-and-drop-a-database-using-microsoft-sql-server-management-studio-17)
      - [Task 3: View the SQL Server log file using PowerShell](#task-3-view-the-sql-server-log-file-using-powershell)
      - [Task 4: Create and drop a database using PowerShell](#task-4-create-and-drop-a-database-using-powershell)
      - [Task 5: Delete the Azure virtual machine resource group](#task-5-delete-the-azure-virtual-machine-resource-group)

## Lab: Managing SQL Server on Linux

### Exercise 1: Connect to SQL Server on Linux

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

1. Create an instance of the **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604** virtual machine in Azure with the following properties:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:

        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2

    -   **Image**: Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04

    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **VM disk type**: Standard HDD

    -   **Public inbound ports**: Allow SSH

    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off

    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

2. When deployment is complete, add a networking rule to permit SQL Server to communicate outside Azure, allow inbound connections on TCP port **1433**.

3. Use PuTTY to connect to the virtual machine that you created in the previous step (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

4. Enable the firewall, and allow inbound connections on TCP port **1433**.

5. Use **mssql-conf** to change the **sa** password to **Pa55w.rd**.

    **Note**: If there is an error in the output, delete the resource group, and start the demo from the beginning.

6. Enable the **mssql-server-agent** package.

7. Start SQL Server, then log into SQL Server with **sqlcmd** to verify that your change was successful.

#### Task 2: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft Visual Studio

1. Use Microsoft Visual Studio 2015 to connect to your SQL Server on Linux instance and execute the following query:
    ```
    SELECT @@SERVERNAME as servername, @@VERSION as version;
    ```

2. Add a data connection to Microsoft Visual Studio, using the **NET Framework Data Provider for SQL Server** as the connectivity library.

3. Close Microsoft Visual Studio when you have finished.

#### Task 3: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17

-   Use SQL Server Management Studio to connect to your SQL Server on Linux instance and execute the following query:
    ```
    SELECT @@SERVERNAME as servername, @@VERSION as version;
    ```

---

### Exercise 2: Manage SQL Server on Linux

#### Task 1: View the SQL Server log file using SQL Server Management Studio

-   Use Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17 Object Explorer to review the SQL Server log file.

#### Task 2: Create and drop a database using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17

1. Use Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17 to create a new database called **ssms_db**.

2. Add a table to **ssms_db**, called **ssms_table**. The table should have the following columns:

    -   **id** bigint NOT NULL

    -   **object_name** varchar(50) NULL

3. Add a row to the table.

4. Drop the **ssms_db** database.

5. Close SSMS without saving any changes.

#### Task 3: View the SQL Server log file using PowerShell

1. Use PowerShell to install the **SqlServer** module.

2. Use the **Get-SqlErrorLog** cmdlet to display the SQL Server log file. Use the **Get-Help Get-SqlErrorLog** if you need help composing the command. Pipe the output to the **Out-Gridview** cmdlet to view the results in a searchable grid.

#### Task 4: Create and drop a database using PowerShell

1. Open **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab05\\Starter\\powershell.txt** in Notepad. Edit the file to perform the following tasks:

    1. Load the SMO assembly, then create an instance of the SMO **Server** class.

    2. Create a new database called **ps_lab_db**.

    3. Enumerate the names of the databases on the server.

    4. Drop the **ps_lab_db** database.

2. Execute the code you have written by copying it from the text file and pasting it into your PowerShell window.

3. Close PowerShell and Notepad without saving any changes.

#### Task 5: Delete the Azure virtual machine resource group

-   In the Azure portal, delete the resources that you created in this exercise.
