# Lab Answer Key: Module 5: Managing Database Solutions on SQL Server for Linux
- [Lab Answer Key: Module 5: Managing Database Solutions on SQL Server for Linux](#lab-answer-key-module-5-managing-database-solutions-on-sql-server-for-linux)
  - [Lab: Managing SQL Server on Linux](#lab-managing-sql-server-on-linux)
    - [Exercise 1: Connect to SQL Server on Linux](#exercise-1-connect-to-sql-server-on-linux)
      - [Task 1: Prepare the lab environment](#task-1-prepare-the-lab-environment)
      - [Task 2: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft Visual Studio](#task-2-connect-to-sql-server-with-microsoft-visual-studio)
      - [Task 3: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17](#task-3-connect-to-sql-server-with-microsoft-sql-server-management-studio-17)
    - [Exercise 2: Manage SQL Server on Linux](#exercise-2-manage-sql-server-on-linux)
      - [Task 1: View the SQL Server log file using SQL Server Management Studio](#task-1-view-the-sql-server-log-file-using-sql-server-management-studio)
      - [Task 2: Create and drop a database using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17](#task-2-create-and-drop-a-database-using-microsoft-sql-server-management-studio-17)
      - [Task 3: View the SQL Server log file using PowerShell](#task-3-view-the-sql-server-log-file-using-powershell)
      - [Task 4: Create and drop a database using PowerShell](#task-4-create-and-drop-a-database-using-powershell)
      - [Task 5: Delete the Azure virtual machine resource group](#task-5-delete-the-azure-virtual-machine-resource-group)

## Lab: Managing SQL Server on Linux

### Exercise 1: Connect to SQL Server on Linux

#### Task 1: Prepare the lab environment

1. Ensure that the **MT17B-WS2016-NAT**, **10999A-MIA-DC** and **10999A-MIA-SQL** virtual machines are running, and then log on to **10999A-MIA-SQL** as **ADVENTUREWORKS\\Student** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.

2. Using Microsoft Internet Explorer®, type **https://portal.azure.com** to display the Azure portal. Enter your Microsoft Azure Pass credentials to log on.

3. In Microsoft Azure, in the left menu, click **+ Create a resource**, in the **Search** box, type **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604**, and then press Enter.

4. On the **SQL Server 2017 on Ubuntu1604** blade, in the **Select a software plan** list, click **Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04**, and then click **Create**.

5. On the **Create a virtual machine** blade, enter the following information, and then click **Next : Disks \>**:

    -   **Subscription**: Your Azure subscription

    -   **Resource group (Create new)**: 10999A

    -   **Virtual machine name**: 10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>, for example **10999AAce2017100**

    -   **Region**: Select the location that is geographically nearest to you

        **Note**: If a message shows that "location is not supported" then please try with any of the below locations:

        -   East US

        -   South Central US

        -   West Europe

        -   Southeast Asia

        -   West US2

    -   **Image**: Free SQL Server License: SQL Server 2017 Developer on Ubuntu 16.04

    -   **Size**: Standard A2 v2

    -   **Authentication type**: Password

    -   **User name**: student

    -   **Password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

    -   **Confirm password**: Pa55w.rdLabs

6. On the **Disks** page, in the **OS disk type** list, click **Standard HDD**, and then click **Next : Networking \>**.

7. On the **Networking** page, next to **Public inbound ports**, click **Allow selected ports**.

8. In the **Select inbound ports** list, select the **SSH** check box, and then click **Next : Management \>**.

9. On the **Management** page, change the value of the following settings, and then click **Review + create**:

    -   **Boot diagnostics**: Off

    -   **Enable auto-shutdown**: Off

10. On the **Review + create** page, review the summary, and then click **Create**. Deployment might take a few minutes to complete.

11. In the left menu, click **Virtual machines**.

12. On the **Virtual machines** blade, click the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** server.

13. On the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, under **Settings**, click **Networking**.

14. On the **Networking** blade, click **Add inbound port rule**.

15. In the **Add inbound security rule** blade, in the **Destination port ranges** box, type **1433**.

16. In the **Name** box, type **MS_SQL**, and then click **Add**.

17. On the **Networking** blade, click **Overview**.

18. On the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

19. On the Desktop, double-click **putty.exe - Shortcut** (for instructions on installing PuTTY, see the *Prerequisites* section of the *Module Overview* for this module).

20. In the **Open File - Security Warning** dialog box, click **Run**.

21. In the **PuTTY Configuration** dialog box, right-click in the **Host Name (or IP address)** box, click **Paste**, and then click **Open**.

22. If a **PuTTY Security Alert** message box appears, click **Yes**.

23. In the **student@10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>:~** window, type **student**, press Enter, type **Pa55w.rdLabs**, and then press Enter. If your login attempt is successful, you will be presented with a prompt starting:
    ```
    student@10999A<YourInitials><Today's Date>:~$
    ```

24. In the PuTTY session, enable the firewall, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo ufw enable
    ```

25. At the Command may disrupt existing ssh connections prompt, type **y**, and then press Enter.

26. In the PuTTY session, to open the port of the SQL Server service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo ufw allow 1433
    ```

27. In the PuTTY session, to verify the state of the SQL Server service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    systemctl status mssql-server
    ```

    If SQL Server is inactive, the output will include a line that begins:
    ```
    Active: inactive (dead)
    ```

    If SQL Server is active, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl stop mssql-server
    ```

28. In the PuTTY session, to change the **sa** password, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set-sa-password
    ```

29. In the PuTTY session, at the **Enter the SQL Server system administrator password** prompt, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then press Enter.

30. In the PuTTY session, at the **Confirm the SQL Server system administrator password** prompt, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then press Enter.

    **Note**: If there is an error in the output, delete the resource group, and start the demo from the beginning.

31. In the PuTTY session, to start SQL Server, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl start mssql-server
    ```

32. In the PuTTY session, to enable the **mssql-server-agent** package, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo /opt/mssql/bin/mssql-conf set sqlagent.enabled true
    ```

33. In the PuTTY session, to restart the SQL Server service, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    sudo systemctl restart mssql-server
    ```

34. In the PuTTY session, to verify that the change was successful, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S localhost -U sa -P Pa55w.rd -Q "SELECT @@servername;"
    ```

    The result should return the server name.

35. Close the PuTTY session.

#### Task 2: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft Visual Studio

1. On the Taskbar, click **Microsoft Visual Studio 2015**.

2. If the **Update Available** dialog box appears at any point, click **Not now**.

3. On the **File** menu, point to **New**, and then click **File**.

4. In the **New File** dialog box, click **Sql File**, and then click **Open**.

5. In the **SqlQuery_1.sql** pane, type the following command, and then click **Execute**:
    ```
    SELECT @@SERVERNAME as servername, @@VERSION as version;
    ```

6. In Internet Explorer, on the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

7. In Microsoft Visual Studio, in the **Connect** dialog box, right-click in the **Server Name** box, and then click **Paste**.

8. In the **Authentication** list, click **SQL Server Authentication**.

9. In the **Login** box, type **sa**, in the **Password** box, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then click **Connect**.

10. In Server Explorer, right-click **Data Connections**, and then click **Add Connection**.

11. In the **Choose Data Source** dialog box, in the **Data source** box, click **Microsoft SQL Server**.

12. Ensure the **Data provider** list has the value **.NET Framework Data Provider for SQL Server**, and then click **Continue**.

13. In the **Add Connection** dialog box, right-click in the **Server name** box, then click **Paste**.

14. In the **Authentication** list, click **SQL Server Authentication**.

15. In the **Login** box, type **sa**, then in the **Password** box, type **Pa55w.rd**.

16. In the **Select or enter a database name** list, click **master**, and then click **OK**.

17. In Server Explorer, expand the **\<server name\>.master.dbo** node to show the object types.

18. Right-click the **\<server name\>.master.dbo** node, and then click **New Query**. Observe that a new connection has been opened to the database in a new query window.

19. Close Microsoft Visual Studio without saving any changes.

#### Task 3: Connect to SQL Server with Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17

1. In Internet Explorer, on the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click **Copy to clipboard**.

2. On the Taskbar, click **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17**.

3. In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, right-click in the **Server name** box, and then click **Paste**.

4. In the **Authentication** list, click **SQL Server Authentication**.

5. In the **Login** box, type **sa**, then in the **Password** box, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then click **Connect**.

6. In Object Explorer, right-click the server IP address, and then click **New Query**.

7. In the **SQLQuery1.sql** pane, type the following command, and then click **Execute**:
    ```
    SELECT @@SERVERNAME as servername, @@VERSION as version;
    ```

    Review the results.

8. Leave SSMS open for the next demonstration.

---

### Exercise 2: Manage SQL Server on Linux

#### Task 1: View the SQL Server log file using SQL Server Management Studio

1. In Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, in Object Explorer, under the node for your server, expand **Management**, expand **SQL Server Logs**, and then double-click the node with the name that begins **Current**.

2. Wait until the **Log File Viewer** opens, examine the log, and then close the Log File Viewer.

#### Task 2: Create and drop a database using Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17

1. In Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17, in Object Explorer, under the node for your server, expand **Databases**, right-click **Databases**, and then click **New Database**.

2. In the **New Database** dialog box, on the **General** page, in the **Database name** box, type **ssms_db**.

3. On the **Options** page, demonstrate all the options available, click **Script**, and then click **OK**.

4. In Object Explorer, under **Databases**, observe that the **ssms_db** node appears. Examine the database creation script generated in the query pane, and then close the script.

5. In Object Explorer, expand **ssms_db** to show its child nodes.

6. Right-click **Tables**, point to **New**, and then click **Table**.

7. In the table creation pane, in the **Column Name** column, in the first row, type **id**, and then press Tab.

8. In the **Data Type** list, select **bigint**, and then clear the **Allow Nulls** check box.

9. In the **Column Name** column, on the second row, type **object_name**, and then press Tab.

10. In the **Data Type** list, select **varchar(50)**.

11. On the **File** menu, click **Save Table_1**.

12. In the **Choose Name** dialog box, in the **Enter a name for the table** box, type **ssms_table**, and then click **OK**.

13. Close the table designer pane.

14. In Object Explorer, expand **Tables**, right-click **dbo.ssms_table**, and then click **Edit Top 200 Rows**.

15. In the data editor pane, on the first row, in the **id** box, type **100**.

16. In the **object_name** box, type **ssms_row**, and then press Tab.

17. Close the data editor pane.

18. In Object Explorer, right-click **ssms_db**, and then click **Delete**.

19. In the **Delete Object** dialog box, select the **Close existing connections** check box, and then click **OK**.

20. Close Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio 17 without saving any changes.

#### Task 3: View the SQL Server log file using PowerShell

1. Right-click Start, and then click **Windows PowerShell (Admin)**.

2. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click **Yes**.

3. At the PowerShell prompt, to install the SqlServer module, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    Install-Module -Name SqlServer -AllowClobber
    ```

4. At the PowerShell prompt, type **y**, and then press Enter.

5. At the PowerShell prompt, type **a**, and then press Enter.

6. At the PowerShell prompt, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    Import-Module -Name SqlServer
    ```

7. In Internet Explorer, on the **10999A\<*YourInitials\>\<Today's Date*\>** blade, next to the **Public IP** address value, click Copy to clipboard.

8. At the PowerShell prompt, type the following command, replacing **\<*IP Address*\>** with the **Public IP** address from the previous step, and then press Enter:
    ```
    $serverInstance = "<IP Address>"
    ```

9. At the PowerShell prompt, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    $credential = Get-Credential
    ```

10. In the **Windows PowerShell credential request** dialog box, in the **User name** box, type **sa**, and then in the **Password** box, type **Pa55w.rd**, and then click **OK**.

11. At the PowerShell prompt, to view the log, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    Get-SqlErrorLog -ServerInstance $serverInstance -Credential $credential -Before (Get-Date).ToUniversalTime() | Out-GridView
    ```

12. Examine the log, and then close the window.

#### Task 4: Create and drop a database using PowerShell

1. Start notepad.exe.

2. In Notepad, on the **File** menu, click **Open**.

3. In the **Open** dialog box, in the **File name** box, type **D:\\Labfiles\\Lab05\\Starter\\powershell.txt**, and then click **Open**.

4. Edit line 2 of the file, to replace **\~assembly\~** with **Microsoft.SqlServer.Smo**.

5. Edit line 3 of the file, to replace **\~class\~** with **Microsoft.SqlServer.Management.Smo.Server**.

6. Select lines 2 and 3 of the file, and then press Ctrl+C.

7. In PowerShell, right-click anywhere in the window to paste, and then press Enter.

8. In Notepad, edit line 9 of the file, to replace **\~db class\~** with **Database**.

9. Edit line 9 of the file to replace **\~db name\~** with **ps_lab_db**.

10. Edit line 10 of the file so that it reads:
    ```
    $db.Create()
    ```

11. Select lines 6 and 10 of the file, and then press Ctrl+C.

12. In PowerShell, right-click anywhere in the window to paste, and then press Enter.

13. At the PowerShell prompt, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    $server.Databases | Foreach-Object {$_.name}
    ```

    Note: If the above command errors, wait a couple of minute and then execute again.

14. At the PowerShell prompt, type the following command, and then press Enter:
    ```
    $db.Drop()
    ```

15. Close PowerShell and Notepad without saving any changes.

#### Task 5: Delete the Azure virtual machine resource group

1. In Internet Explorer, on the left blade of the Azure portal, click **Resource groups**.

2. On the **Resource groups** blade, click **10999A**.

3. On the **10999A blade,** click **Delete resource group**.

4. On the **Are you sure you want to delete"10999A"?** blade, type **10999A**, and then click **Delete**. This deletes the virtual machines.

5. If there is a **NetworkWatcherRG** resource group present, repeat steps 2 to 4 to delete.

6. Close all open programs and windows.
